cloud: add a doc for statement insight (#23486)
pingcap/docs: tidb-cloud/statement-insight.md

Statement Insight is a historical, baseline-oriented view. 

> **Note:**
>
> Statement Insight is in public preview and available only for a limited number of {{{ .premium }}} instances, with broader rollout to {{{ .premium }}} instances planned in a subsequent release. To request early access, contact [TiDB Cloud Support](/tidb-cloud/tidb-cloud-support.md).

## Before you begin

Because Statement Insight only starts collecting data after it is enabled for your instance, keep the following in mind when you first open the page:

- No historical data is backfilled. You only see data from the time the feature was activated on your instance.
- The available time range grows day by day. For example, you see about one week of data after the feature has been running for a week.

## Open Statement Insight

1. Log in to the [TiDB Cloud console](https://tidbcloud.com/) and navigate to your {{{ .premium }}} instance.

> 2. In the left navigation pane, click **Monitoring** > **Diagnosis** > **Statement Insight**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. In the left navigation pane, click **Monitoring** > **Diagnosis**.
3. On the **Diagnosis** page, click the **Statement Insight** tab.
```

## Set filters

Use the filters at the top of the page to narrow down the data:

- **Time range**: select a preset interval or a custom range.
- **DB User**: filter by the database user that executed the SQL statements. In the current preview, this filter supports selecting a single user; support for selecting multiple users is planned for a future release.
- **SQL Type**: filter by SQL statement type, such as `SELECT`, `INSERT`, or `UPDATE`.
- **Database**: filter by the database that the SQL statements ran against.
- **SQL Digest**: filter by a specific SQL digest.

All filters can be combined to narrow the analysis to the SQL statements you care about.

## Analyze RU consumption, latency, and execution counts

> The **SQL Overview** panel summarizes the SQL statements that match your filters, sliced by multiple dimensions. For each dimension, you can switch the **Measured by** control to change which metric drives both the leaderboard and the trend chart:

Reviewer: There is no **SQL Overview** panel. Do you mean "Top Contributors" panel?

Author: yes

---

> title: Statement Insight(Preview)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Statement Insight (PREVIEW)
```

> summary: Learn how to use Statement Insight to analyze historical RU consumption, latency, and execution counts by DB User, SQL Type, or SQL Digest, and to build RU and performance baselines for your TiDB Cloud instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
summary: Learn how to use Statement Insight to analyze historical RU consumption, latency, and execution counts by DB user, DB, table, SQL type, or SQL digest, and to build RU and performance baselines for your TiDB Cloud instances.
```

---

> # Statement Insight(Preview)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Statement Insight (PREVIEW)
```

> 

Reviewer: Question: the current UI code only exposes Statement Insight for **Premium** (NextGen) and **Essential/Serverless** (ClusterV2, behind `EssentialEnhancedStatementEnable`). I don't see BYOC support in the codebase—`isBYOC` is not used in any Statement Insight tab/route logic. Are you sure BYOC should be listed here? If not, please remove `{{{ .byoc }}}` from this line and the other occurrences (lines 18 and 25).

> **Statement Insight** provides multi-dimensional analysis of SQL resource consumption for your {{{ .premium }}}, {{{ .byoc }}}, {{{ .essential }}} instances. It breaks down Request Unit (RU) consumption, latency, and execution counts by **DB User**, **DB**, **Table**, **SQL Type**, or **SQL Digest**, with leaderboards and trend charts that surface your top contributors at a glance. Use Statement Insight to establish RU and performance baselines from historical data and pinpoint what is driving RU consumptions or slowdowns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Statement Insight** provides multi-dimensional analysis of SQL resource consumption for your <CustomContent plan="essential,premium">{{{ .essential }}} and {{{ .premium }}}</CustomContent><CustomContent plan="byoc">{{{ .essential }}}, {{{ .premium }}}, and {{{ .byoc }}}</CustomContent> instances. It breaks down Request Unit (RU) consumption, latency, and execution counts by **DB User**, **DB**, **Table**, **SQL Type**, or **SQL Digest**, with leaderboards and trend charts that surface your top contributors at a glance. Use Statement Insight to establish RU and performance baselines from historical data and pinpoint what is driving RU consumptions or slowdowns.
```

Statement Insight is a historical, baseline-oriented view. 

> **Note:**
>

> > Statement Insight is in public preview and available only for a limited number of {{{ .premium }}}, {{{ .byoc }}}, {{{ .essential }}} instances, with broader rollout planned in a subsequent release. To request early access, contact [TiDB Cloud Support](/tidb-cloud/tidb-cloud-support.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Statement Insight is in public preview and available only for a limited number of {{{ .premium }}}, {{{ .byoc }}}, {{{ .essential }}} instances created on or after August 19, with broader rollout planned in a subsequent release. To request early access, contact [TiDB Cloud Support](/tidb-cloud/tidb-cloud-support.md).
```

> > For instances where Statement Insight is not yet available, you can continue to use SQL Statement in the meantime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> For instances where Statement Insight is not yet available, you can continue to use the [SQL Statement](/tidb-cloud/tune-performance.md#statement-analysis) tab for statement analysis in the meantime.
```

> 

Reviewer: This wording implies there is a separate **Measured by** control for each dimension. In the UI, **Measured by** is a single global dropdown at the top of the **Top Contributors** panel; changing it updates all dimension cards and the trend chart at once. Suggested rephrase:

> Use the **Measured by** control at the top of the panel to change the metric that drives both the contributor leaderboards and the trend chart.

## Before you begin

Because Statement Insight only starts collecting data after it is enabled for your instance, keep the following in mind when you first open the page:

- No historical data is backfilled. You only see data from the time the feature was activated on your instance.
- The available time range grows day by day. For example, you see about one day of data after the feature has been running for a day.

## Open Statement Insight

> 1. Log in to the [TiDB Cloud console](https://tidbcloud.com/) and navigate to your {{{ .premium }}}, {{{ .byoc }}}, {{{ .essential }}} instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Log in to the [TiDB Cloud console](https://tidbcloud.com/) and navigate to your <CustomContent plan="essential,premium">{{{ .essential }}} or {{{ .premium }}}</CustomContent><CustomContent plan="byoc">{{{ .essential }}}, {{{ .premium }}}, or {{{ .byoc }}}</CustomContent> instance.
```

2. In the left navigation pane, click **Monitoring** > **Diagnosis**.
3. On the **Diagnosis** page, click the **Statement Insight** tab.

## Set filters

Use the filters at the top of the page to narrow down the data:

> - **Time range**: select a preset interval or a custom range.

Reviewer: Missing metric: the UI also offers **Plans Count** (`plan_count`) in the **Measured by** dropdown. Reference: `dbaas-ui/src/dbaas/screens/ClusterV2/features/Diagnosis/StatementV2/statementV2.ts`. Please add:
```
- **Plans Count**: the number of distinct execution plans.
```

> 1. Log in to the [TiDB Cloud console](https://tidbcloud.com/) and navigate to your <CustomContent plan="premium">{{{ .premium }}}</CustomContent><CustomContent plan="byoc">{{{ .premium }}}, or {{{ .byoc }}}</CustomContent> instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Log in to the [TiDB Cloud console](https://tidbcloud.com/) and navigate to your <CustomContent plan="premium">{{{ .premium }}}</CustomContent><CustomContent plan="byoc">{{{ .premium }}} or {{{ .byoc }}}</CustomContent> instance.
```

- **DB User**: filter by the database user that executed the SQL statements. 
- **SQL Type**: filter by SQL statement type, such as `SELECT`, `INSERT`, or `UPDATE`.
- **Database**: filter by the database that the SQL statements ran against.
- **Table**: filter by the table that the SQL statements ran against.

> - **SQL Digest**: filter by a specific SQL digest.

Reviewer: There is no filter for SQL Digest. Do you mean a keyword filter?
<img width="1884" height="282" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/26ad8766-d3dd-431c-aec5-00690afece45" />

```suggestion
- **Keyword**: filter by a keyword that matches the SQL digest text.
```

> All filters can be combined to narrow the analysis to the SQL statements you care about.

Reviewer: This filter is not a specific SQL digest selector. The UI provides a generic **Filter Keyword** text input, and the API uses a `text` parameter for keyword matching against SQL digest text / sample SQL text. Suggested rephrase:

> - **Keyword**: filter by a keyword that matches the SQL digest text or sample SQL text.

## Analyze RU consumption, latency, and execution counts

The **Top Contributors** panel summarizes the SQL statements that match your filters, sliced by multiple dimensions. For each dimension, you can switch the **Measured by** control to change which metric drives both the leaderboard and the trend chart:

> - **Total RU**: the sum of RU consumed.

Reviewer: The UI displays up to 10 top values per dimension (`items.slice(0, 10)`). Suggested rephrase:

> - **Top values**: the top 10 values ranked by the metric selected in **Measured by**.

- **Mean RU**: total RU divided by execution count.
- **Total latency**: the sum of execution latency.
- **Mean latency**: total latency divided by execution count.

> - **Execution count**: the number of times the SQL statements were executed.

Reviewer: missing “Plans Count”

> ### Top Contributors of DB Users, SQL Types, SQL Digests, DBs and Tables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Top contributors by DB user, SQL type, SQL digest, DB, and table
```

> For each dimension (DB User, SQL Type, SQL Digest, DB or Table), the panel shows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each dimension (DB User, SQL Type, SQL Digest, DB, or Table), the panel shows:
```

- **Total count**: the total number of distinct values for the dimension among the selected SQL statements. For example, the total number of distinct DB users that ran the selected SQL statements.

> - **Top values**: the top values ranked by the metric selected in **Measured by**. For example, if **Measured by** is set to **Total RU**, the panel shows the top DB users, SQL types, SQL digests, DBs or Tables that consumed the most RU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Top values**: the top values ranked by the metric selected in **Measured by**. For example, if **Measured by** is set to **Total RU**, the panel shows the top DB users, SQL types, SQL digests, DBs, or Tables that consumed the most RU.
```

### Trend charts

> The trend chart shows how the selected metric changes over time for the dimension you are viewing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Resource Usage Over Time** trend chart shows how the selected metric changes over time for the dimension you are viewing.
```

## Limitations

> - Statement Insight is intended for historical analysis and RU or performance baselining. The displayed RU differs from the RU usage reported on your TiDB Cloud invoice due to differences in collection and aggregation（Statement Insight displays cumulative RU consumption）. Do not use Statement Insight data for billing reconciliation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Statement Insight is intended for historical analysis and RU or performance baselining. The displayed RU differs from the RU usage reported on your TiDB Cloud invoice due to differences in data collection and aggregation (Statement Insight displays cumulative RU consumption). Do not use Statement Insight data for billing reconciliation.
```

> - Data freshness is up to **10 minutes**, matching the underlying collection cycle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Data freshness interval is up to **10 minutes**, matching the underlying collection cycle.
```

## FAQ

### Why is there no data, or only a short time range of data, in Statement Insight?

> Statement Insight does not backfill historical data. Data starts accumulating from the moment the feature is enabled on your instance, and the available time range grows over time. If you enabled the feature recently, this is expected behavior, not a sign of missing or broken data.

Reviewer: How do customers enable this feature?

> Statement Insight does not backfill historical data. Data starts accumulating from the moment the feature is enabled on your instance, and the available time range grows over time. If you enabled the feature recently, this is expected behavior, not a sign of missing or broken data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Statement Insight does not backfill historical data. Data starts accumulating from the moment the feature is enabled on your instance, and the available time range grows over time. If the feature was enabled for your instance recently, this is expected behavior, not a sign of missing or broken data.
```

### What is the difference between Statement Insight and Top RU?

> [Top RU](/tidb-cloud/top-ru.md) is a near-real-time tool for diagnosing an ongoing RU spike: it ranks SQL statements by cumulative RU consumption and only collects and displays Top SQLs and major fields, including statements that are still executing, over a short, recent time window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Top RU](/tidb-cloud/top-ru.md) is a near-real-time tool for diagnosing an ongoing RU spike: it ranks SQL statements by cumulative RU consumption and focuses on the top RU-consuming SQL statements and key fields, including statements that are still executing, over a short, recent time window.
```
